# Puzzle
The end of the world

Suppose that you are presented with a puzzle composed of ten pieces that eventually fits into a rectangular canvas. Any human, say a child, will probably start by selecting the first piece placing in the canvas, then the next one and place it, then the next and so on until either all pieces match or in case there is a impasse, take out a piece or two and rearrange until a match is found. This process may take a few seconds or even minutes depending on the complexity of the puzzle or the capabilities of the solver and it is considered as a task of human intelligence, or intelligence, in general. Now consider the following possibility. I take the pieces of the puzzle and toss them in the air, let them fall and hope that a match is found. If it does not work I do it again; and again; and again. Over and over; hoping for a match. What are the chances that a match will occur? Most people will say impossible. And yet simple logic may reveal that while a match in unlikely to come soon, yet, logic says that it must occur. Necessarily; by definition the chance must exist since I am referring to it as a possibility. Given enough time there is a possibility, once in a (x)illion perhaps, that it will happen. Actually, we can calculate that number with accuracy and determine the maximum number of attempts that it will take for it to occur. However, nobody will try this method mainly because there is no time to wait. But with a computer such logic starts to be applicable. A billion for example is not such a big number. Think of a GHz: this is one billion of cycles per second. So, let’s try this process through a computer program. In the first trial, it took 212,421 unsuccessful attempts to eventually get a match, taking virtually only about 10 seconds on a 2.9 GHz Intel "Core i7" processor with my not so efficient algorithm. Next time it took 74,730 (or about 3 seconds) unsuccessful attempts until a match occurred. So, if you were to choose between the two methods you are faced with the following dilemma: should I employ my intelligence and take several minutes to solve the problem or use a mindless chance mechanism and solve the same problem in just a few milliseconds? To some people this may be a very fundamental question.

But here is where the problem get even more interesting: how many possible ways can we solve this puzzle? Is there infinite ways or is there a specific number of possible permutations? What if we start by placing every block one by one in all possible ways. In other words, arrange systematically all 10 blocks in all 40 grid locations, in all four 90-degree rotations and in all two reflections. Then, we will produce every possible arrangement of blocks, specifically 3,200*10 to the power of 10 (or 32 trillion), some of which will be puzzle solutions. Of course, when done this method will have discovered eventually all possible puzzle solutions, namely 1,465. There will be no other solution. Moreover, if we are looking fo the "perfect" puzzle solution, it will be there, somewhere, necessarily. For example, suppose we define as "perfect" the principle of symmetry. Then the process involves creating all possible solutions and then extracting only the symmetrical ones. In other words, before we start searching for the perfect solution, we already know that somewhere in the vast amount of pattern, somewhere out there, there is a perfect solution. All we need is to extract it out of everything. Or, to rephrase, to recollect it from whatever you know. In a way, this method is the exact opposite of a trial-and-error method, where we produce randomly or through an intelligent algorithm puzzle solution and then evaluate each puzzle solution, getting closer and closer to more perfect (in this case symmetrical) solutions. But there is no guarantee that it will be the most perfect one. Only if we go through all possible solutions can we guarantee that this is indeed the best. Simply, because we went through everything else.
